JUDY WOODRUFF: The government of
Russia announced today that the
U.S. would need to drastically
reduce the number of
its officials working
in Russia, and could no
longer use two properties
there.
Hari Sreenivasan is
in New York with more.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
move follows two American
actions, both related to
the Russian interference
in the 2016 U.S.
presidential election.
Last December, the
Obama administration
seized two Russian-owned
compounds in the U.S., and
expelled 35 Russian diplomats
who the U.S. claimed were
intelligence operatives.
Yesterday, the U.S.
Senate passed a bill that
included new sanctions on
Russia for its election
hacking.
That bill now awaits the
president's signature or veto.
With me now is special
correspondent Nick Schifrin.
Nick, in addition to what
Judy just told us, what
are the Russians demanding?
NICK SCHIFRIN: Yes.
By September the 1st, the
U.S. has to reduce its staff
inside of Russia to 455.
That's at the embassy in
Moscow and three consulates
around the country.
And by Monday, they will lose
access to a storage facility
inside Moscow, as well as
a country house that
they generally use
right outside of Moscow.
And Russia vows to punish them
even more if the U.S. responds.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is the
State Department concerned?
Do we have lots
more people there?
NICK SCHIFRIN: Yes, this is a
major escalation because of the
numbers of people who are there.
Former U.S. officials tell me
that there are anywhere from
1,100 to 1,500 staff in Russia,
so to bring that down to
455 could mean expelling
hundreds and hundreds
and hundreds of U.S.
staff.
That is on a magnitude
much higher than the
expelling of 35 Russians
believed to be intelligence
officers by President
Obama last year.
And so, clearly, today's
announcement is designed
not just to affect
U.S. ability to conduct
intelligence in Russia, but the
U.S. ability entirely, the U.S.
government's entire ability
to conduct its
operations in Russia.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Well, what
are the Russians that you
spoke to today telling you?
Is this significant enough?
Is this a turning point?
NICK SCHIFRIN: It could be a
turning point, because it does
seem to signify that President
Vladimir Putin has given
up his hope that the
relationship could get better.
You know, the U.S. and Russia
have high-level talks going on
right now, and Russia certainly
had been expecting some
concessions out of that, but one
Russian official told me today
- - quote -- "We came to a point
where there was no that hope
those talks could yield any
results."
And that lack of hope really
pervades the entire Russian
point of view right now.
They hoped, perhaps
expected, President Trump
to improve the relationship.
And other than some pro-Russian
rhetoric, not much has changed.
There are still country
homes not returned to Russia.
There are still sanctions,
and, as you mentioned,
that congressional bill.
So, Russians have been delayed
this response for seven
months, hoping the relationship
would get better.
And it seems like their
patience has run out.
And, Hari, the U.S. would
say, look, it was Russia that
brought us to this point, both
the election hacking and
its actions in Ukraine.
Russia says, we
didn't hack anything.
And the statement today calls
what the U.S. is doing a
witch-hunt -- quote -- "The U.S.
is using Russia's alleged
interference in its
domestic affairs as an
absolutely contrived
excuse for its persevering and
crude campaigns against Russia."
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally,
put this in perspective.
You just did a long
series on Russia.
Where is the relationship
between the two countries
in the longer arc?
NICK SCHIFRIN: Even during the
Cold War, there was no occasion
when either side kicked out
hundreds of the
other person's staff.
A lot of Russia watchers
told me today that they think
it's about the early '80s.
It's been that long since this
relationship was that bad.
That's, of course, after the
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
Now, what brought the
relationship better in
the '80s was a change
eventually in Soviet
leadership.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yes.
NICK SCHIFRIN: And President
Putin is not going anywhere.
And so the question is, how
does the U.S. respond, not
only to today, but also does
President Trump sign
that congressional bill
increasing sanctions?
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Nick Schifrin, many thanks.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Thank you.